SECOND TERM E-LEARNING NOTE

SUBJECT: COMPUTER STUDIES CLASS: JSS1

SCHEME OF WORK

WEEK TOPIC

1. Introduction to Computer Monitor

2. The System Unit

3. Computer Ethics

4. Word processing I

5. Word processingII

6. Data processing I

7. Data Processing II

8. Features of a Computer

9. The keyboard and its sections I

10. The Keyboard and its Sections II

11. Revision

12.Examination

REFERENCE

A Handbook on Computer Studies (Practical Guide for Schools and Colleges
By: NiyiAdekolegan, Computer Studies Stella Chiemeke, Modern computer
studies by Victoria Dinehin.

WEEK ONE Date: ………………

TOPIC: COMPUTER AND MONITOR

REF. BOOK: Welcome to Computer Studies. By BoyeJokotoye

CONTENT:

THE MONITOR

The monitor is an output device used to display information. The monitor
is also called Visual Display Unit (VDU). It is similar to ordinary
television screen. The output on a monitor is called softcopy. This
output is available to the user only for as long as another output has
not replaced it. Thus, the output in the monitor is temporary.

A monitor is one of the most common output devices which is used to
display information (either data or result) on the screen.

TYPES OF MONITOR

There are two types of monitors.

1. Monochrome monitor.

2. Coloured Monitor.

MONOCHROME MONITOR

Monochrome monitors are very similar to black and white television sets.
They display their output in just one colour. Monochrome monitors are of
two types, Monochrome Text Monitor which can only display text and
number character in single colour and Monochrome Graphics Monitor which
can display texts as well as graphics such as charts, maps, diagrams and
other pictures all in one colour.

COLOURED MONITOR

Coloured monitor can display text and pictures in more than one colour.
Different types of colour monitors have been developed. These are:

1. CGA (Colour Graphic Adapter) which can display only 16 colours.

2. EGA (Enhanced Graphic Adapter) which displays 64 colours.

3. VGA (Video Graphic Adapter). This can display 262,144 colours.

4. SVGA (Super Video Graphic Adapter). This can display more than
262,144 colours.

CATHODE RAY TUBE MONITORS

These are the most common type of monitors for office and the home. They
make use of Cathode Ray Tube (CRT).

LCD MONITORS

Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) monitors were developed because of the
bulky nature of CRTs. Unlike the technology used in CRTs, the technology
for portable monitors involves liquid crystals. LCD monitors are thinner
than CRTS.

EVALUATION

1.  What is a Monitor?

2.  Mention the two types of monitor.

CONCLUSION

We have learnt that the monitor is an output device used to display
information. We have also known the differences between the Cathode Ray
Tube (CRT) and Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) monitors.

There are two types of monitors i.e. Monochrome and Colour monitors. We
have learnt that monochrome monitors can only display information in one
colour while colour monitors can display information in more than one
colour.

GENERAL EVALUATION

1a. What is a monitor?

1b. Give the full meaning of the following:

(i) VDU

(ii) LCD

  (iii) CRT

2a. Mention the two types of monitors.

2b. Write out the full meaning of each of the following:

(i) CGA (ii) EGA (iii) VGA (iv) SVGA

READING ASSIGNMENT

A Handbook on Computer Studies (Practical Guide for Schools and
Colleges.

By: NiyiAdekolegan. Chapter Ten, pages 63-64; 68 – 69.

Computer Studies Stella Chiemeke book 1 pgs 69.

Modern computer studies by Victoria Dinehinpg 41-43

WEEKEND ASSIGNMENT

OBJECTIVES

1. ………… is an output device that shows information.

(a) Keyboard (b) Monitor (c) CPU (d) ALU

2. Another name for monitor is ……………(a) CPU (b) VDU (c) DVU (D) MEMORY

3. ………….. monitor can display information only in one colour.

(a) Colour (b) Black and White (c) Monochrome (d) colour

4. …………. monitor can display information in different colours.

(a) Monochrome (b) Black and White (c) Colour (d) all of the above

5. Which of the monitor can display 16 colours? (a) CGA (b) EGA (c) SVGA
(d) EGA

THEORY

1. Mention any TWO types of coloured monitor you know.

2. Write short notes on: (a) Monochrome monitor.(b) Coloured monitor.

WEEKTWO Date:……………….

TOPIC:THE SYSTEM UNIT

REF. BOOK: Early Learning of Computer Studies for Junior Secondary
Schools.

By: YomiSoyombo

CONTENT:

THE SYSTEM UNIT

A System unit also known as a base unit, is electronic circuitry housed
within the computer cabinet. It is the part of the micro computer that
contains the Central Processing Unit (CPU).

THE INTERNAL FEATURES OF THE SYSTEM UNIT

Is the main body of a personal computer, typically consisting of a
plastic/metal enclosure containing thefollowing:

i.  Motherboard,

ii. power supply,

iii. cooling fans,

iv. internal disk drives,

v.  the memory modules and

vi. expansion cards that are plugged into the motherboard such as video
    and network cards.

CENTRAL PROCESSING UNIT

The CPU is a processing device found inside the system unit. It is
mounted on the motherboard which is also inside the system unit. The
function of a CPU is to perform the processing of data received from the
input devices. The major components of the CPU are as follows:

1.  Arithmetic and Logic Unit (ALU)

2.  Control Unit

3.  Memory Unit

The system units of micro computers are of different shapes. These
include the following:

(i) Notebook

(ii) Palmtop

(iii) Desktop

(iv) Tower

(v) Slim line etc.

NOTEBOOK

This is a micro computer that is small and light enough to be moved
easily from one place to another. It can fit into most briefcases. They
are the most popular computers today.

PALMTOP

These are also known as Personal Digital Assistants (PDA) and are much
smaller than laptops. This device combines pen input, writing
recognition, personal organizational tools and communication
capabilities in a very small package.

DESKTOP

These are small enough to fit on top or along the side of a desk and yet
are too big to carry around.

TOWER

Tower casing system unit is a little bit taller than the desktop, hence,
it is placed under the table or on the floor.

SLIM LINE

This is a system unit that stands independently beside the monitor and
the keyboard.

EVALUATION

1.  What is system unit?

2.  List and explain the different shapes of the system unit.

THE EXTERNAL FEATURES OF SYSTEM UNITS

The external parts of system units include:

1. The power button

2. Reset button

3. The key lock

4. The Drives

5. The Ports

POWER BUTTON

The power button is pressed to put the system ON or OFF. It is used to
start the system from scratch.

RESET BUTTON

Reset button is used to initialize the system. The button is pressed to
restart the system.

THE KEY LOCK

The key lock is used to PUT ON and OFF the computer. When the key lock
is in OFF mode, the system cannot accept data. For the system to accept
data, the key lock must be on.

THE DRIVES

The disk drive is a part or device on which disks are loaded and run. It
enables us to use compact disks and diskettes. A computer has more than
one drive e.g. A: - Floppy disk drive, C: - Hard disk drive,D: - Compact
disk drive etc.

THE PORTS

These are sockets on the outside of the system unit into which you can
plug a terminal or some other input/output devices. They are the areas
where peripheral devices are connected to the system unit. Ports are
used to connect the keyboard, the mouse, the monitor, the printer, etc.

CONCLUSION

External features of the system unit include the power button, reset
button, key lock, drives, ports etc and their various functions.

We have also learnt that the system unit houses the Central Processing
Unit (CPU) and comes in different shapes and sizes e.g. notebook,
palmtop, desktop, etc.

GENERAL EVALUATION

1a. What is a System Unit?

1b. List any three system units casing.

2a. Mention any THREE external features of a system unit.

2b. State what each of these drives represents. (i) A: …………….(ii) C:
…………….

READING ASSIGNMENT

A Handbook on Computer Studies Book 1 (Practical Guide for Schools and
Colleges.

By: NiyiAdekolegan. Chapter Eight, pages 55 – 56; 69 – 70..

Computer Studies Stella Chiemeke book 1 pg 73.

Modern Computer Studies by Victoria Dinehinpg50

WEEKEND ASSIGNMENT

OBJECTIVE

1. ………………. is used to start the computer from the scratch.

(a) Power button (b) Ports (c) Reset button (d) none of the above

2. The ____ is used to restart the computer. (a) reset button (b) key
lock (c) drive (d) power button

3. A: drive represents ____ drive. (a) floppy disk (b) hard disk (c)
compact disk (d) ports

4. We can connect other peripheral devices to the system unit through
the ………..

(a) drives (b) ports (c) key lock (d) power button

5. For the computer to accept data, the ……….. must be on.

(a) drives (b) key lock (c) ports (d) none of the above

THEORY

1a. What is a System Unit?

1b. List any THREE system unit casings.

2a. List any THREE internal and external features each of a system unit.

2b. State what each of the following drives represents.

A: ……………………

D: ……………………

WEEKTHREE Date: ………………

TOPIC: COMPUTER ETHICS

Introduction

Computers functions best when used in the right environment. The right
environment can be refers to as the computer room/laboratory. Computer
room is a room specially created for keeping computers and other
peripheral devices.

COMPUTER ROOM REQUIREMENT

- Computer system

- Furniture

- Tiles

- Electricity source

- Stabilizer

- Air conditioners/fans

- Mouse and mouse pad

- Uninterruptible Power Supply(UPS).

- Printer

- Speaker

- Window Blind

- Fire extinguisher

- Surge protector

- Dusk cover

- Printer paper

WAYS OF MAINTAINING THE COMPUTER ROOM

1.  A dust-free environment should be maintained in the computer room

2.  The computer room should be appropriately ventilated.

3.  The computer room should have appropriate lighting system.

4.  The computer room should be well furnished.

5.  All the computers in the computer room should be covered.

6.  There should be strong security around the computer room.

EVALUATION

1.  What is computer Ethics

2.  Mention five ways of maintaining the computer room

Laboratory Rules and Regulations

1.  Pupils are prohibited to enter the lab unless authorized by the
    teacher.

2.  Scan flash drive before using them.

3.  Report all problems related to the systems to the teacher.

4.  Do not attempt to repair or tamper with lab equipment.

5.  Be responsible when using equipment, software and facilities in the
    lab.

6.  Do not move any equipment from it original position.

7.  Do not remove or load any software into the computer.

8.  All electrical appliances should be switched off at the end of each
    day activities.

9.  Always cover the computer system after use.

10. Noise should be discouraged in the computer room.

GENERAL EVALUATION

1.  What is Computer Ethics?

2.  Mention at least Ten Computer Room Requirements.

3.  State five ways of maintaining the computer room.

4.  State seven rules and regulations of the computer room.

READING ASSIGMENT

Computer studies for Junior Secondary Education JSS1 By HiitPlc pages
68 - 69

WEEKEND ASSIGNMENT

1.  ………. is a room specially created for keeping computers and other
    peripheral devices. (a) clinic (b) Computer room (c) laundry (d)
    Store house

2.  Which of the following is not a computer room equipment? (a)
    spoon (b) fire extinguisher (c) dust cover (d) printer

3.  There should be ……… around the computer room. (a) strong
    security (b) slack security (c) loose security (d) all of the above

4.  Noise should be discouraged in the computer room. (a) True (b) False

5.  The Computer system should be covered with …….. after use. (a) dust
    cover (b) rag (c) window blind (d) none of the above

THEORY

1.  What is computer ethics?

2.  Mention five rules that must be observed in the computer laboratory.

3.  List five ways of maintaining the computer room.

4.  Mention Ten things that are required in the Computer room.

WEEK FOUR Date:……………….

TOPIC: WORD PROCESSING I

Reference Book– Welcome to Computer Studies ByBoyeJokotoye

CONTENT

Definition

Uses of word processor

Loading and exiting word processor

Creating,saving and retrieve files

INTRODUCTION TO WORD PROCESSING PACKAGES

A word processing package enables you to type in and manipulate text. It
helps you to enter, store, format, copy and print text. It is a software
that turns the computer into a sophisticated typewriter.

With any type of word processing software, you can produce any kind of
document, large or small, whether personal letter, business report,
school report sheet, circular etc. and save the document for future
reference.

The word processing software allows you to determine how you want the
finished page to look i.e. page size, line, width, margin etc. Once you
are satisfied that everything look all right, you can print out any
number of copies on paper.

FUNCTIONS OF WORD PROCESSING

1. Text correcting/Editing

2. Inserting paragraph

3. Deletion of sentence, words, paragraphs etc.

4. Correction of wring spelling

5. Inclusion of graphics

Examples of word processor: word perfect,word Star,MS-word,loco Script,
Ami-Pro,Word Craft,notepad, WordPad.

Starting Microsoft word: Click the start button to bring the start menu;
click program; click on Microsoft word

Create a new document: Click on file ,clicknew, start typing

Saving a document:click on file, click save, make a choice of location
to save in, type the name you want to save it as, click command button
‘save’

Opening an existing document: click on file, clickopen, click on the
document- saved- in location or other storage devices.

EVALUATION

1.  Define Word Processing Package?

2.  State four uses of word processing.

3.  List five examples of word processing packages.

FEATURES OF WORD PROCESSING PACKAGES

1. WORD WRAP - Instead of pressing ‘Enter key’ at the end of every line
while typing, word wrap automatically moves the insertion point to the
next line when you reach the end of the current line and allows you to
continue typing without having to press the ‘Enter key’ to start a new
line.

2. EDITING OF DOCUMENT– Once you have finished typing your document, you
can then use WORD basic editing techniques. These include inserting
text, deleting text, moving paragraphs from one position to another,
etc.

3. DELETING TEXT– Word processing features allows for deletion, that is,
the removal of unwanted text. Some can be deleted using ‘delete key’
while you can also press ‘back space key’ to delete text depending on
where you place the cursor before deletion.

4. INSERTING TEXT– The process of adding text in-between existing text;
it could be a character or a full statement.

5. PAGE FORMATING– This is the standard setting of page format.
Information in page formatting include the length of each line, number
of lines per page, the size of the margin and line spacing.

6. SPELLING CHECKER– This is a program to detect and correct wrongly
spelt words. Spelling programs read word processing files and compare
each word to the computer dictionary. It then underlines any wrongly
spelt word and gives suggested spelling options.

7. SAVE AUTO RECOVER– When you are working, you can sometimes forget to
save regularly, which could mean you lose your work hence, you saved in
the event of power outage. Microsoft Word provides an automatic save
feature that you can set to ensure that your documents are saved
regularly. However, this depends on the specific time interval in
minutes set by you.

8. NON-PRINTING CHARACTER– Microsoft Word provides a feature called
Non-Printing Characters that has certain landmarks you might find
helpful as you create your document. These keys include ‘ENTER key’,
‘TAB key’ and ‘SPACEBAR key’. They are called non-printing character
because though they appear on the screen, they will not appear in the
printed document.

ADVANTAGES OF USING WORD PROCESSING PACKAGES

1. The use of computer allows for neat jobs.

2. It makes typing pleasurable.

3. There is room for corrections such that it does not leave any scar on
the document.

4. With the use of computer, text could be formatted to suit the user’s
taste.

5. It allows Mail Merging operation thereby relieving the secretary of
the problem of having to type a particular document a number of times.

6. It allows the production of as many copies of the document as the
owner will need and each appears as the original.

7. It has the capability of storing text for as long as it will be
needed.

8. Document can be enhanced with graphics (pictures)

GENERAL EVALUATION

1.  Define word processing.

2.  List and explain five features of Word Processing

3.  State what word processing can be used for.

READING ASSIGNMENT

Computer studies Stella Chiemeke book 1 pgs 73-77.83-89

Modern Computer Studies by Victoria Dinehinpg 47-53

A Handbook On Computer By: Kolawole S. Owolabi

WEEKEND ASSIGNMENT

1. …………package enables you to type in and manipulate text.

(a) Word processing (b) Spreadsheet (c) Corel Draw (d) database

2. Which of these CANNOT be done with word processing package?

(a) sleeping (b) typing (c) printing (d) sorting

3. One of these is NOT a function of word processing.

(a) Title bar (b) Text correction (c) Deletion of pages (d) duplicating

4. Word processing can be used to produce any kind of document except

(a) letter writing (b) journalism (c) memo (d) graph

5. One of these is an example of word processing package.

(a) Microsoft Word (b) Microsoft Excel (c) Corel Draw (d) Graphics

THEORY

1.  List the functions of Word Processing packages.

Briefly explain the following: (i) Word wrap (ii) Editing of document
(iii) Spelling checker (iv) Non-printing character

2. Mention any FIVE examples of Word Processing packages.

WEEK FIVE Date:……………….

TOPIC: WORD PROCESSING II (PRACTICAL)

ADVANTAGES OF USING WORD PROCESSING PACKAGES

1. The use of computer allows for neat jobs.

2. It makes typing pleasurable.

3. There is room for corrections such that it does not leave any scar on
the document.

4. With the use of computer, text could be formatted to suit the user’s
taste.

5. It allows Mail Merging operation thereby relieving the secretary of
the problem of having to type a particular document a number of times.

6. It allows the production of as many copies of the document as the
owner will need and each appears as the original.

7. It has the capability of storing text for as long as it will be
needed.

8. Document can be enhanced with graphics (pictures)

Steps in loading Microsoft Word

1.  Click the start button to bring the stsart menu.

2.  From the pull down menu, click on Microsoft word.

Steps in creating a New Document

1.  Click on the office button.

2.  Click on New.

3.  Click on create

4.  Start typing your work.

Steps for Saving a Document

1.  Click on the office button.

2.  Click on Save.

3.  Make a choice of location to save in, type the name you want to save
    it with and click on save.

4.  click command button ‘save’

EVALUATION

1.  State the steps in loading Microsoft word.

2.  Highlight the steps in saving a document.

Steps in opening an existing

1.  From the office button, click open.

2.  Click on the document.

3.  Click on open.

4.  click on the document- saved- in location or other storage devices.

Steps for Printing a document

1.  Click on the office button.

2.  Click on Print.

3.  Select print options such as printer’s name, page range numbers of
    copy, print what, orientation and page seize.

4.  Click on ok or press enter key.

Steps for Closing a document in Microsoft Word

1.  From the title bar, click on X button and the document window
    closes.

2.  To close and exist from Word: From the office button, choose exit.

GENERAL EVALUATION

1.  State the steps in opening an existing document.

2.  State the steps in printing a document

3.  State the steps in closing a document.

READING ASSIGMENT

Computer studies Stella Chiemeke book 1 pgs 73-77.83-89

Modern Computer Studies by Victoria Dinehinpg 47-53

WEEKEND ASSIGNMENT

1.  Word processing can be used to produce any kind of document.(a)
    Yes (b) No (c) None of the above (d) All of the Above

2. One of these is an example of word processing package.

(a) Microsoft Word (b) Microsoft Excel (c) Corel Draw (d) None

3. …………package enables you to type in and manipulate text.

(a) Word processing (b) Spreadsheet (c) Corel Draw (d) Excel

4. Which of these CANNOT be done with word processing package?

(a) sleeping (b) typing (c) printing (d) Excel

5. One of these is NOT a function of word processing.

(a) Title bar (b) Text correction (c) Deletion of pages (d) Query

THEORY

1.  State the steps in opening an existing document.

2.  State the steps in printing a document

3.  State the steps in closing a document.

WEEKSIX Date:……………….

TOPIC: DATA PROCESSINGI

Reference Book – Early Learning of Computer Studies By: YomiSoyombo

DATA PROCESSING

Data processing is the process of converting data into meaningful
information. It involves collection of data or gathering of data. Data
processing often refers to the use of computers in commercial
applications as distinct from engineering applications. It is also an
act of collecting data, assembling them and making them available to the
processor in a machine form that the computer can work on.

DATA COLLECTION STAGES

Data collection stage is bringing data to a central point. It means
gathering of data from its point of origin to be processed.

The stages include the following:

1. DATA CREATION– This is the process of getting data from source. The
document of which data is first recorded is called Source Document.

2. DATA TRANSMISSION– This refers to sending and receiving of data via
telecommunication network. That is, the movement of data from one
location to another for processing.

3. DATA PREPARATION– This is a pre-processing of ‘raw’ data from the
source document to machine sensible form.

4. DATA VERIFICATION– This is the process of checking input data to make
sure it was entered correctly.

5. SORTING– This is a re-arrangement of data in some specified sequence
required for processing.

6. MEDIA CONVERSION– It is a transfer of data from one medium to
another. Data is often prepared in one medium and converted to another
medium.

7. VALIDATION– Validation is a process of checking input data to make
sure that it is logically correct. It enables us to correct error that
escapes verification.

8. INPUT/PROCESSING– This is the act of passing data in a machine
sensible form to processing stage. The data is submitted to the
processor for processing.

EVALUATION

1. What is data processing?

2. List and explain any TWO data collection stages.

STAGES IN DATA PROCESSING

The repetitive nature of data processing can be well described as a
processing cycle. It is simply a sequence of procedures or steps
required to perform a given task repetitively.

Stages in data processing refer to various stages which data passes
through before it becomes information. The stages include:

1. ORIGINATION OF DATA

  This can be described as the creating and gathering of data from
  elements such as source documents.

2. PREPARATION

  This step is associated with the transcription, sorting and
  arrangement of data before entry into a computer.

3. INPUT DATA

  This is the process of entering data into the computer. It is the
  entry of data through the input devices e.g. keyboard.

4. PROCESSING OF DATA

  It concerns all exercises of data processing such as calculating,
  sorting and classifying.

5. OUTPUT OF DATA

  The desired end of the processing of data will finally be reached and
  produced. The output in soft copy or hard copy will take the shape of
  written reports, graphical representation, drawing, etc.

6. STORAGE OF DATA

  This is the process of saving the result of the processed data in a
  manner that will permit easy retrieval.

STAGES IN DATA PROCESSING DIAGRAM

ORIGINATION OF DATA

PREPARATION OF DATA

INPUT DATA

PROCESSING OF DATA

STORAGE OF DATA

OUTPUT OF DATA

GENERAL EVALUATION

1.  Explain the stages in data processing activities.

2.  List and explain each stages in data processing.

READING ASSIGNMENT

Computer studies Stella Chiemeke book 1 pgs33-38.

Modern Computer Studies by Victoria Dinehinpg18-19

WEEKEND ASSIGNMENT

1. When data is fully processed it becomes ……………….

(a) information (b) word (c) sentence (d) Raw

2. The process of converting data into meaningful information is
called………..(a) data processing (b) data creation (c) sorting (d) None

3. The document of which data is first recorded is called ………………

(a) source document (b) object document (c) real document (d) code

4. The process of getting data from source is called ……………….

(a) data creating (b) data preparation (c) data validation (d) data
collation

5. Sending and receiving of data via telecommunication network is called
……………..

(a) data transmission (b) data processing (c) validation (d) Output

THEORY

1. What is data processing?

2. With the aid of a diagram, explain in detail the stages in data
processing concept.

WEEK SEVEN Date:……………….

TOPIC: DATA PROCESSING II

COMPUTER PROCESSING MODES

There are different basic types of processing; namely:

1.  Batch processing

2.  Real time processing

3.  Time sharing processing

4.  Demand processing

Batch processing: In Batch processing, data are gathered over a period
of time and the batch of transactions is processed together. It employs
sequentially processing technique which consists of processing the first
record of the file sequence, then the second record in that order.
Examples of batch systems includepayroll system, stock control, sales
ledger etc.

Advantages of batch processing

1.  It is economical and efficient for applications such as preparation
    of customer bills

2.  It saves time

Disadvantage

1.  It may not be necessary or useful for all situations

EVALUATION

1.  Explain computer processing modes.

2.  State the four modes of data processing

Real time processing: With real time processing, data are processed one
– by one within the same time – frame and the reports are produced
quickly enough to influence decision in the ongoing process. It is
appropriate for some banking applications, air line reservation system
etc.

Interactive Processing: The system displays questions and prompt
messages on VDU,screen and the users provides appropriate response
through the keyboard e.g Purchasing, inventory etc.

On-Line Processing: This involves obtaining input data directly from the
point where it is needed. Application areas include banking, Stock
exchange etc.

TransactionProcessing: The transactions are processed randomly one by
one as they supplied to the system e.g. real time banking.

Advantages of using computer for data Processing

1.  Increased accuracy.

2.  Efficient storage.

3.  Quick access to information.

4.  Ability to handle repetive tasks.

GENERAL EVALUATION

1.  State the modes of computer processing

2.  Mention the application areas of each processing mode.

READING ASSIGNMENT

Computer studies for Junior Secondary Education JSS1 By HiitPlcpages 22
– 24.

WEEKEND ASSIGNMENT

1.  In ……. processing, data are gathered over a period of time and the
    batch of transactions is processed together.(a) batch (b)
    transaction (c) real time (d) on line

  2. The …….. system displays questions and prompt messages on
  VDU,.screen and the users provides appropriate response through the
  keyboard (a) batch (b) interactive

  (c)transaction (d) real time

3. The …………..are processed randomly one by one as they supplied to the
system.

  (a) real time (b) online (c) transaction (d) none of the above

4. ………. processing involves obtaining input data directly from the point
where it is needed (a) online (b) transaction (c) real time (d) batch
(b) purchasing (c)inventory

  (d) all of the above

5.  …….. is an application area of on- line processing (a) banking

THEORY

1.  State the modes of computer processing.

2.  Mention the application areas of each processing mode.

WEEK EIGHT Date:……………….

TOPIC: FEATURES OF A COMPUTER

TYPES OF MICRO COMPUTER

Micro computer is the smallest and the cheapest class of computers built
for special purposes, e.g. for use in clocks, cameras etc. Micro
computer contains between ten thousand and two million bytes of internal
memory locations, a micro processor and can allow few input/output
devices to be attached to it. Micro computer is often referred to as
desktop computer because it can conveniently fit on desktop.

Another name for micro computer is PERSONAL COMPUTER (PC).

TYPES OF MICRO COMPUTER

1. Laptop

2. Palmtop

3. Notebook

4. Desktop

5. Tower etc.

EVALUATION

1.  What is microcomputer?

2.  Mention five types of micro computer.

REASONS WHY MICRO COMPUTERS ARE WIDELY USED

1. It is very cheap.

2. It has a small size.

3. It is built for special purposes.

4. It does not require special environment for its use.

5. Micro computers can be used anywhere.

FEATURES OF COMPUTER AS EXCELLENT TOOL FOR DATA PROCESSING

1.  Increased Accuracy

2.  Efficient Storage Facilities.

3.  Fast Access to Information.

4.  Handles Repetitive Tasks

5.  Decision Making Capability

CONCLUSION

We have learnt that micro computers are the smallest and cheapest class
of computers. There are various types of micro computers which are
laptop, palmtop, notebook, desktop etc. We have also known why micro
computers are widely used and the features of computer that makes it an
excellent tool for data processing.

GENERAL EVALUATION

1. List any THREE types of micro computer.

2. State any TWO reasons why micro computer is widely used.

3. State five features of a micro computer that makes it an excellent
tool for data processing.

READING ASSIGNMENT

A Handbook on Computer Studies (Practical Guide for Schools and
Colleges.

By: NiyiAdekolegan. Chapter Nine, pages 62 – 64.

Modern computer studies by Victoria Dinehinpg20

WEEKEND ASSIGNMENT

OBJECTIVE

1. ……….. is the smallest computer in terms of size.

(a) Micro computer (b) Big computer (c) Super computer (d) Mainframe

2. Which of the following is an example of a micro computer?

(a) Laptop (b) Tabletop (c) Knee top (d) Super

3. ……….. is another name for micro computer.

(a) Personal computer (b) Super computer (c) Desktop (d) Mini computer

4. Micro computers can be used anywhere. (a) True (b)False

5. The computers that sit on desks in homes, offices etc. are called
…………computers.

(a) desktop (b) mobile (c) digital (d) Hybrid

THEORY

1. List any FOUR types of micro computer.

2. State any TWO reasons why micro computer is widely used.

3. State five features of a micro computer that makes it an excellent
tool for data

WEEK NINE Date:……………….

TOPIC: THE KEYBOARD AND TYPES OF KEYBOARD

CONTENT:

Definition of the Keyboard

The keyboard is an input device that is used to send data into the
computer. Its cable must be connected to a port of the system unit
before it can operate. It is similar to an ordinary typewriter keyboard.
The keyboard is used mainly to enter alphabets from A – Z, numeric
digits 0 – 9 and special signs and punctuation marks such as ( ), +, %,
!etc.

This device converts numbers, letters, and special characters that
people understand into electrical signals. These signals are sent to and
processed by the CPU. It is the most important input device.

TYPES OF KEYBOARD

There are two types of keyboard. These are:

1. Standard keyboard

2. Enhanced keyboard

STANDARD KEYBOARD

This is a keyboard that has between 84 – 89 keys. It has 10 function
keys and 4 arrow keys.

ENHANCED KEYBOARD

This keyboard has between 101 – 104 keys. It has 12 function keys and 8
arrow keys.

DIFFERENT TYPES OF KEYBOARD

1.  Multimedia keyboard.

2.  Programming keyboard.

3.  Cordless keyboard.

SECTIONS OF THE KEYBOARD

The keyboard is divided into sections namely:

(i) The numeric keys

(ii) The alphabetic keys

(iii) Function keys

(iv) Arrow keys

(v) Special keys

THE NUMERIC KEYS

This is used for fast entering of numeric data. It is located on the
right side of the keyboard and contains numbers 0-9. The numeric key is
active when Num Lock Key is on.

ALPHABETIC KEYS

These are keys with letters A-Z. The alphabetic keys are 26 in number.

FUNCTION KEYS

These are the keys labeled F1 – F12 and are essentially used to perform
special functions on the computer. They serve different purposes
depending on which application is being used. Function keys are used in
conjunction with other keys.

ARROW KEYS

They are navigation keys used to control the cursor either up or down,
right or left on the screen.

SPECIAL KEYS

They are used to perform special functions. They include:

(a) Shift key (b) Control key (Ctrl) (c) Alternate key (Alt) (d) Caps
lock key (e) Enter key (f) Backspace key (g) Tab key (h) Space bar key
which is the longest key on the keyboard (i) Insert key (j) Delete key,
etc.

CONCLUSION

The keyboard is an input device used to send data into the computer. We
have learnt that there are two types of keyboard which are Standard
Keyboard and Enhanced Keyboard.

There are also five sections on the keyboard which are: Numeric keys,
Alphabetic keys, Function keys, Arrow keys and Special keys.

EVALUATION

1a. What is a keyboard?

1b. List the TWO types of keyboard.

2a. Mention any THREE sections of the keyboard.

2b. List any FIVE special keys on the keyboard.

READING ASSIGNMENT

A Handbook on Computer Studies (Practical Guide for Schools and
Colleges.

By: NiyiAdekolegan. Chapter Eight, pages 55– 61.

Computer Studies Stella Chiemeke book 1 pg 62; pgs 73-77.

Modern Computer Studies by Victoria Dinehinpg 33-37; pg 47-53

WEEKEND ASSIGNMENT

OBJECTIVE

1. ………… keyboard has 10 function keys.

(a) Standard (b) Enhanced (c) Windows (d) All of the Above

2. The function keys are labelled………. on the keyboard.

(a) Function (b) F1 – F12 (c) 0 – 9 (d) F1 – F15

3. The keys with A – Z on the keyboard are called …………

(a) Numeric keys (b) Alphabet keys (c) Arrow keys (d) Page

4. ………… is the longest key on the keyboard.

(a) Space bar key (b) Delete key (c) Enter key (d) Shift Key

5. ……….. keys are used to control the cursor. (a) Arrow (b) Function (c)
Alphabet

(d) Symbol

THEORY

1a. What is a keyboard?

1b, Write short notes on: (a)Standard keyboard(b) Enhanced keyboard

2a. Mention any TWO sections of the keyboard.

2b. List any THREE special keys on the keyboard.

WEEK: TEN Date:……………….

TOPIC: THE KEYBOARD AND TYPES OF KEYBOARD II

CONTROL KEYS:they are used in line with other keys to instruct the
computer to perform specific tasks. They are ctrl, del Esc and Alt.

CURSOR- CONTROL KEYS: otherwise known as curdor manipulations keys allow
the user to move the cursor to the left, right, up one line and down one
line.

APPLICATION (TASK MENU): This perform the same function as right
clicking the mouse.

CTRL: This ia sometimes used in conjuction with one or two other keys to
give command to the computer e.g. ctrl s, ctrl

DEL: Stand for Delete, it is used to cancel the character to the right
of the cursor and it can be used to delete selected text or object.

WINDOWS LOGO KEYS: They are used to activate the start menu from which
programs can be launched.

ALT: This key can be used in combination with other keys e.g. ALT + F4

HOME: Moves the cursor to the beginning of a line.

END: Moves the cursor to the end of a line or screen display.

PAGE UP: Moves the page on the screen.

PAGE DOWN: Moves the page down on the screen

PRINT SCREEN: Copies the entire content of a computer screen of the
clipboard.

TAP KEY:The key is marked with double arrows facing opposite directions.
It shiftthe cursor eight spaces to the right at each press.

THE SPACE BAR: This is the longest key and it is used for producing
spaces.

SHIFT KEY: It is used to enter both upper and lower case characters.

ENTER/ RETURN KEY: They enter or return key moves the cursor down.

BACK SPACE KEY: This key deletes the character to the left.

CAPS LOCK KEY: It is a toggle key that needs to be depressed in order to
get out of capitalization.

DIRECTION KEYS: To move the cursor right, left, up, down without
deleting any characters.

EVALUATION

1.  Explain the function of the following keyboard section keys (a)
    Print screen (b) shift key

(c) home key (d) alt (e) space bar key

2.  Explain task menu.

FEATURES OF KEYBOARD

1.  Rollover Capability: The keyboard has rollover capability i. e
    several keys can be pressed almost simultaneously and they will be
    registered in sequence.

2.  Auto-Repeat Capability: Most of the keys on the keyboard have
    auto-repeat capability. When a key with this feature is held down,
    it will repeat until it is release or another key is pressed.

Uses of keyboard

1.  It is used to enter text, number and punctuation mark.

2.  It can be used to shut down the computer system in the absence of
    the mouse.

3.  CTRL + ALT + DEL can be used to restart computer during warm
    booting.

GENERAL EVALUATION

1.  Explain the two features of keyboard.

2.  Mention three uses of the keyboard.

Computer studies for Junior Secondary Education JSS 1 By HiitPlc pages
41 - 43

WEEKEND ASSIGNMENT

1.  The ……… key is the longest key and it is used for producing
    spaces.(a) delete(b) space bar (c) home (d) print

2.  The ……… is used to enter both upper and lower case characters.(a)
    End key (b) ctrl key (c) shift key (d) page up

3.  To enter or return key moves the cursor down use ……… key (a)
    enter (b) home (c) left arrow (d) shift

4.  . …. key deletes the character to the left.(a) back space (b)
    shift (c) home (d) Alt

5.  The keyboard features where several keys can be pressed almost
    simultaneously and they will be registered in sequence is
    called(a)page down (b) Auto repeat (c) Rollover Capability (d) Ctrl
    +Alt Del

THEORY

1.  Explain the function of the following keyboard section keys

(a) Print screen (b) shift key (c) home key (d) alt (e) space bar key

2.  Explain the following features of the keyboard

(a) Rollover Capability (b) Auto Repeat Capability
