NAME:…………………………………………………………...........CLASS:………………………………

SECOND TERM: E-LEARNING NOTES

JS 2(BASIC 8)

SUBJECT: COMPUTER STUDIES

SCHEME OF WORK

WEEK TOPIC

1. Revision of first terms work

2. Programming Language: (a) Meaning of computer program (b) Computer
Programming Language i. Meaning ii. Examples (Logo, BASIC, etc)

3 & 4 BASIC: (a) Basic Language: i. Meaning of BASIC ii. BASIC character
set

  (b) Key BASIC Statement: i. Line number ii. Remark (REM) iii.
  Assignment (LET, INPUT, DATA). iv. Output Statement v. Print vi.
  Program Terminator (END, STOP) (c) Simple BASIC Statements.

5&6 Graphic Packages 1: (a) Meaning of graphic package (b) Examples of
graphic package: paint, Corel Draw, Instant Artist, Harvard graphics,
Photo shops, log graphic etc (c) Features of graphic packages: Tool bar,
Menu bar, Printable area, Colour Palette. etc.

7&8 Graphic packages II: The Paint: (i) The Paint Environment -
identification of features of the paint environment. (ii) Paint tools
and their functions

9. Graphic Packages II: (iii) Using Paint to draw and colour simple
objects. (Practical work)

10. Revision

11. Examination

WEEK 1

Activity: Revision of first terms work

WEEK 2

Date: __________

Topic: Programming Language: Meaning of Computer program, computer
programming language - meaning, examples

CONTENT: i. Meaning of computer program

ii. Computer programming language – meaning, example (Logo, BASIC etc)

Meaning of computer program

A set of instructions to the computer to perform a specific task written
in a specific programming language is called computer program.

Meaning of programming language

A programming language is the language in which a computer programmer
writes the instructions which a computer should follow in solving a
given problem.

A programmer is someone who writes instructions for computer to perform
a specific task. Programming is the act of writing instructions for
computer to perform a specific task. A computer person that writes a set
of instructions for the computer to obey is referred to as computer
programmer.

The three main categories of programming languages are:

1. Machine language

2. Low level language

3. High level language

Machine Language

A language in which the computer performs the instructions immediately
without any further transaction is called machine language. The machine
language is the computer primary language. It is the only language that
the computer understands and does not require interpretation. It is
usually written in the forms of Os and Is. Machine language is referred
to as the first generation programming language because it was the
earliest computer programming language.

Low Level Language

Low level language is machine dependent language written in symbolic
codes but human being understands it better than machine language. It
must be translated to machine language before execution. They are very
difficult to use and cannot be used interchangeably on different types
of computer. However, they also produce the fastest programs.

High level language

High level language is the programming language written by the
programmer in form of English language for better understanding. It uses
symbols and words to give instructions to the computer. High level
language must also be translated into machine for language execution. It
is less machine dependent unlike machine language.

Sub-Topic: Types of high level language

There are five types of high level language. They are:

1. Scientific language

2. Multi-purpose language

3. Commercial language

4. Command language for operating system

5. Special purpose programming language.

Scientific Language

This is the language that is used for scientific and engineering
purposes. Examples include FORTRAN – Formula Translator, BASIC –
Beginner All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Codes. It combines the
features of the extensive arithmetic computational ability and the
ability to handle mathematical expression.

Multi-Purpose

This types of high level programming language can cope with a number of
different types of application areas. Examples of multi-purpose language
are Visual BASIC, C++, Java etc.

Commercial Language

This type of program was first developed by the American Government
Defensive Department to create a common administrative language for
internal and external use. The prominent language is COBOL (Common
Business Oriented Language).

Command for Operating System

This program language is used to control the operating system. An
example is DOS Commands (Disk Operating System commands.)

Special Purpose Language

This is programming language designed for a specific assignment. It is
tailored towards a particular problem. E.g. Structural Query Language.

Evaluation

1. What is Computer program?

2. Who is a programmer?

3. State differences between Machine language and High level language.

Reading Assignment

Read the next week topic i.e. BASIC Programming, from ‘A hand book on
computer studies, by Niyi Adekolegan. Chapter seven, page 61-71

Weekend Assignment

1. The full meaning of FORTRAN is (a) Formation of Transport

  (b) Formula Translator (c) Form of Test (d) Formular Transportation

2. ______ is someone who writes instructions for computer to perform a
specific task. (a) Instructor (c) Engineering (c) Programmer (d)
Educator

3. _______ is the programming language written by the programmer in form
of English language for better understanding. (a) High level language
(b) Low level language (c) Machine language (d) Small level language

4. ______ is machine dependent language written in symbolic codes. (a)
High level language (b) Low level language (c) Machine language (d)
Small level language

5. _______ is only language that the computer understands and does not
require interpretation. . (a) Low level language (b) High level language

(c) Small level language (d) Machine language

WEEK 3 & 4

Date: __________

Topic: BASIC Programming: (a) BASIC Language (b) Key BASIC Statement (c)
Simple BASIC

Statements.

CONTENT: (a) Basic Language: i. Meaning of BASIC ii. BASIC character set

  (b) Key BASIC Statement: i. Line number ii. Remark (REM) iii.
  Assignment (LET, INPUT, DATA). iv. Output Statement v. Print vi.
  Program Terminator (END, STOP) (c) Simple BASIC Statements.

Meaning of BASIC

BASIC stands for Beginner All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code. It is
not only simple but also a very powerful high level programming
language. It consists of statements written in English words and
mathematical notation. It is written in a human understandable form. Its
syntax is close to the natural way of solving some human problems.

Rules for BASIC programming

1. All expressions must be written in capital letters.

2. First character must be alphabet

3. BASIC statement or keyword must start with a line number.

4. Each line must contain only one BASIC program statement.

5. There must not be full stop at the end of a statement.

6. The start/begin statement must be the first entry in a program.

7. End/Stop statement must be the last entry in a program.

Element of BASIC

1. Character Set: This refers to any letter, number, sign or symbol and
punctuation mark in any language used for representation of information.
Character set are: Numbers 0 - 9, Alphabets A - Z, Special characters or
symbols +, -, *, /, <, &, :, ; etc

2. Data Constants & Data Variables

i. Data Constant (or constants)

  These are data that do not change during the course of computation or
  program execution.

ii. Data Variables (variables)

They are data that can change in constant numerals versus variable
numerals.

Constant data Variables data

10 A = 1 10 Input A

20 B = 2 20 Input B

30 Sum = A + B 30 Sum = A + B

40 PRINT SUM, A, B 40 PRINT SUM, A, B

50 END 50 END

3. Reserved or Keyword:

  This is also referred to as a BASIC statement. It is an instruction
  which has special meaning to the computer or BASIC interpreter.
  Examples: REM, LET, INPUT, READ, PRINT, GOTO, FOR…., NEXT etc.

Sub-Topic 2: Key BASIC Statement

i. LINE numbers

In BASIC we need a line number for each basic statement. Numbers are
positive whole numbers from 1 to 99,999. A line number is always in
integer form and this are done to give room for correction when
necessary. It is presented in the format below:

10 ……………………..

20 ……………………..

30 ……………………..

40 …………………….. etc.

ii. REM Statement (Remark)

REM statements stand for remark. The statement allows you to add comment
and explanatory notes to your program. This may as well include date and
what the program is all about. Computer does not execute REM; it is just
a remark that aids the programmer to remember certain thing about the
program.

Examples: REM PROGRAMM TO SAY HELLO

REM TO CALCULATE AREA OF A TRIANGLE

Sub-Topic 3: Key BASIC Statement (Cont.)

iii. ASSIGNMENT Statement

Assignments consists of the following: INPUT, LET and DATA

INPUT Statement

This allows you to type in data from the keyboard while the program is
running. This program will be able to produce the required result with
given data. The input statements have the general format.

10 INPUT A

20 INPUT B

30 INPUT C

Example: 10 INPUTm “YOUR NAME” =$

10 INPUT “m YOURSURNAME”, =$

LET Statement

The LET statement permits the programmer to assign numbers and formulas
to a variable name.

Example: 10 LET AREA = ½ (b*h)

20 LET JS=”How do you do”

30 LET ANN=50

DATA Statement

The statement (Read and Data) goes hand in hand. Data statement is used
to enter data into a program before running the program or before
program execution occurs. The data to be entered into the program is
read from DATA statement.

E.g. 10 READ A, B, C, D

20 DATA 3, 5, 10, 15

iv. OUTPUT Statement

The result of the processed data is displayed by output statement. The
PRINT statement: bring out the processed data. The print statement has
the general format.

Example: 20 PRINT D, E, C OR

20 PRINT A, $, C

v. PROGRAM TERMINATOR (END, STOP)

END Statement: this always indicates the end of a BASIC program. When
the computer comes across the end statement in a program, the computer
automatically ends. End should always be the last statement in the
program to indicate the physical end of the program.

STOP indicates when the logical executions of a program should cease.

Example: 40 STOP

Sub-Topic 4: Simple BASIC Statements

Structure of BASIC program

- One instruction or statement per line

- Each line must begin with a line number

- Line numbers are unsigned positive integers

- Line number should increase in steps of 10 to allow for insertion of
  extra lines during program modification.

Example 1: Write a BASIC program to find the average of three numbers.

Solution:

5 REM FIND AVERAGE

10 READ A

15 READ B

20 READ C

25 SUM=A+B+C

30 AVE=SUM/3

35 PRINT AVE

40 DATA 5, 10, 15

45 END

Example 2: Write a BASIC program to calculate the volume of a box.

Solution:

10 REM FIND THE VOLUME OF A BOX

20 READ L,B,H

30 READ V=L*B*H

40 DATA 3,5,10

50 PRINT V

60 END

Evaluation

1. Write a BASIC program to find the average of five numbers.

2. Write short nonnte on program terminator.

3. Explain the following: Character set, constants and variables

Reading Assignment

Read the next week topic i.e. Graphic Package – Corel Draw – practice on
the use of the tools. ‘A hand book on computer studies, by Niyi
Adekolegan. Chapter Eleven, page 99-107

Weekend Assignment

1. _____ this always indicates the end of a BASIC program. (a) Start
statement (b) Constant (c) End statement (d) Line statement

2. _____ statement is used to enter data into a program before running
the program or before program execution occurs. (a) Data statement (b)
Line statement (c) End statement (d) Let statement

3. ____allows you to type in data from the keyboard while the program is
running. (a) Let statement (b) Data statement (c) Input statement

  (d) Output statement

4. ____allows you to add comment and explanatory notes to your program.

  (a) Input statement (b) Data statement (c) Rem Statement (d) Output
  statement

5. ____ consists of statements written in English words and mathematical
notation. (a) BASIC (b) FORTRAN (c) Programming (d) Constants

Theory

1. List five rules for BASIC programming.

WEEK 5 & 6

Date: __________

TOPIC: Graphic Packages 1:

CONTENT: (a) Meaning of graphic package

  (b) Examples of graphic package: paint, Corel Draw, Instant Artist,
  Harvard graphics, Photo shops, log graphic etc

  (c) Features of graphic packages: Tool bar, Menu bar, Printable area,
  Colour Palette. etc.

  (d) Practical Design

Meaning of graphic package

A package is software written to perform a particular task. A graphics
use lines, shapes, colours and patterns to show information. Apart from
being able to draw lines and other geometric shapes, it is also possible
to do full art works and painting in full colours of any kind of
objects. Graphic images can be created using computers.

Examples of Graphic Packages

All these can be produced with art illustration graphic software. They
are:

i. Paint

ii. Corel Draw

iii. Instant Artist

iv. Harvard graphics

v. Photo shops

vi. Logo graphics

Corel Draw

This can be defined as a high-quality graphic designed and developed for
automating artistic functions. Corel draw was developed by Corel
Corporation founded in June 1985. This corporation has a network of over
100 distributors in more than 40 countries.

Corel Draw Version

There are many versions of Corel Draw ranges from Corel 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 14, 15 and 16. The uses of all the versions are similar only
with little modifications and improvement to the advantage of the user.
However, the teaching will be based on Corel Draw 11 versions.

Loading Corel Draw 11

- Click start in the task bar

- Click all programs

- Click Corel graphic suite 11

- Click CorelDRAW 11

OR

Double click Corel Draw ICON

Sub-topic 2: The Features of Corel Draw

[]

1. Title Bar: It displays application name and file name at the top of
the package.

2. Menu Bar: It displays the various command use to work on the program.

3. Page Layout: This is a workspace for user’s work. It is otherwise
known as printable page.

4. Standard Tool Bar: This bar contains icon and commands for performing
operations on documents.

5. Status Bar: It displays detailed information about programs selected.

6. Ruler: This is used for measuring objects in order to obtain accurate
size. There are two types: horizontal and vertical.

7. Properties Bar: It displays detailed information about graphic/text
selected.

8. Scroll Bar: They are used for scrolling page layout/work in the
desired direction (Horizontal and Vertical)

9. Colour Palette: It displays various colours used for colouring any
selected object/text.

10. Tool Box: This contains the tools used to create, fill, and modify
your drawing.

(Show the workspace of Corel DRAW with features; also explain the
tools/command in the tool box)

Sub-topic 3: Practical: Using the toolbox to design ‘Nigerian Flag’.

Sub-Topic 4: Practical: Using the toolbox to design ‘MTN Logo’.

[]

Evaluation

1. Explain Corel Draw.

2. What is Package?

3. List examples of Corel draw.

Weekend Assignment

Design the following:

i. DLHS Logo

ii. A man paddling a canoe on the sea.

WEEK 7 & 8

Date: __________

Topic: Graphic Packages II: The Paint

CONTENT: (i) The Paint Environment - identification of features of the
paint environment.

  (ii) Paint tools and their functions.

The Paint Environment

Paint is a program you can use to create drawings on a blank canvas or
top of other pictures. The program features a tool bar on the left side
of the window.

Loading Paint

- Click on the start icon in the button in the bottom left corner of the
  screen.

- Click the programs option.

- Click on Accessories to see sub menus.

- Click on the paint environment.

[]

Features of Paint Environment

1. Title bar

2. Tool box

3. Workspace

4. Restore Button

5. Minimize Button

6. Close Button

Sub-Topic 2: Using the tools

Find the tool bar on the screen. The icons on this bar stand for the
different things you can do.

The small pictures on the toolbar are called icons. Icon is a graphical
representation of a symbol. [C:\Users\Austin\Desktop\DSC_0000094.jpg]

No.1 is called freeform tool, is used to select any irregular part of an
object or picture.

No.2 is used for selection of a square or rectangular part of the
object.

No.3 is called eraser. It allows you to rub out the lines and shapes you
have drawn.

No.4 Is used to fill the entire picture or an enclosed shape with
colour.

No.5 is used to set the current foreground colour or background colour.

No.6 is called magnifier and is used to zoom in on a section of your
object.

No.7 is called pencil and is used to draw thin freehand lines.

No.8 is called brush and the function is to paint thick or shaped free
form line and curve.

No.9 is called Air brush and the function is to create an airbrush
effect in the object or picture.

No. 10 Is known as text tool and is used to entre text in the object or
picture.

No.11 is used to draw a straight line.

No. 12 is used to draw a smooth, curved line.

No.13 is used to draw rectangular shapes.

No.14 is called polygon and the function is to make a shape with any
number of sides.

No.15 is used to make eclipse and circles.

No.16 is used to draw rectangular shapes with rounded edges.

Sub-Topic 3: Practical steps on how to draw a house

Steps:

i. Go to paint environment and select any object you want to draw e.g. a
house.

ii. You first make use of the rectangle; you place it and then draw
another rectangle below the drawn rectangle already.

iii. After that, you will still make use of a square or a rectangular to
create a window.

iv. Moreover, you use a rounded rectangle or a curve for the door and
then either a dot or a circle for the door knob and you are through with
the construction of the house.

v. Nevertheless, if you insist on painting brush and the colour of your
desired choice. And if there is any error, you click on eraser and
select on the size of eraser you think would be okay for your amendment.

Sub-Topic 4: Practical steps on how to draw a television

Steps:

i. Go to paint and then click on a rounded rectangle and you place it on
the page.

ii. You click on the same rounded rectangle but this time around, you
thicken it to bring out its beauty, you place it inside the one you have
already placed

iii. Moreover, as for the creation of the antenna, you click on line,
you draw on top of the rounded rectangle, and as for the picture viewed
in the television, you click on clip art and select your image then you
are through.

Evaluation

1. List the features of paint.

2. What is pencil and brush use for?

Weekend Assignment

1. Design a cup.

2. Design Nigeria flag.

WEEK 9

Date: __________

TOPIC: Graphic Packages II: (Cont.)

CONTENT: (iii) Using Paint to draw and colour simple objects. (Practical
work)

Sub-Topic 1: (Practical work)

Sub-Topic 2: (Practical work)
