NAME____________________________________CLASS: _______

SECOND TERM E-LEARNING NOTES

JS 3 (BASIC 9)

SUBJECT: COMPUTER SCIENCE

SCHEME OF WORK

WEEK TOPIC

1 Revision of First term work

2. Spreadsheet Packages:

  First Period: (a) Meaning (b) Examples of spreadsheet package: (i)
  Excel (ii) LOTUS 1,2,3 (iii) Statview etc.

Second Period: (b) Uses of spreadsheet packages: (i) preparation of
daily sales (ii) Budget

  (iii) Examination result, etc.

3. Spreadsheet packages cont.

  First & second

  period: (a) Spreadsheet features and terminologies (i) Row (ii) Column
  (iii)) Cell

  (iv) Worksheet (v) Chart (vi) Data range etc.

  (b) Loading and exiting spreadsheet packages.

4. Worksheets

  First Period: (a) Starting Excel worksheet: i.e. (i) opening a
  worksheet (ii) Data entry (iii) Editing (iv) saving (v) Retrieving
  worksheet

Second Period: (b) Formatting worksheet, i.e. (text, cell and column,
naming, etc)

5. Worksheets cont.

  First period: (c) Excel calculations: (i) Addition (ii) Subtraction
  (iii) Average (iv) Counting (v) Multiplication (vi) Division, etc

Second: (d) Printing of worksheets

6. Practical on excel calculation.

7. Graphs:

  First period: (a) Creating Graphs. (i) Line graph (ii) Histograms
  (iii) Pie-charts (iv) Legends, etc.

Second Period: (b) Editing graphs

8. Graphs cont.

F & S period: (c) Formatting graphs: (i) Line graph (ii) Histograms
(iii) Pie-charts (iv) Legends

9. Practical on Excel graphs.

10. Revision

WEEK 1. Revision of First term work

WEEK 2

TOPIC: SPREADSHEET PACKAGES I

Content: - Meaning and Definition of Spreadsheet Package

- USES OF SPREADSHEET PACKAGES

Sub-Topic 1: Meaning and Definition of Spreadsheet Package

A Package can be defined as software written to perform a particular
task. Therefore, a Spreadsheet Package is a program that enables the
computer user to carry out calculation-related tasks. Spreadsheets are
majorly used for organizing and analyzing numeric data. They were
designed to replace the pencil, calculator and the writing pad.

It is widely used in diverse range of discipline like Engineering,
Mathematics, Science, Accounting, etc.

Examples of Spreadsheet Package.

- Lotus 1-2-3

- Microsoft Excel

- STATVIEW

- Quattro pro

- Easy Calc

- GS-Calc

- Super-Calc

- Visical

NOTE: For the purpose of this lesson, our focus shall be on Microsoft
Excel because it is user-friendly, flexible and contains more advanced
features.

Sub-topic 2:

USES OF SPREADSHEET PACKAGES

- For Statistical analysis

- For Mathematical purposes

- Regression analysis

- Budget management and control

- Preparation of daily sales report

- Stock / Inventory control analysis

- Preparation of examination results

- Accounting purpose

- Financial projection and analysis

- Preparation of Payroll, etc

EVALUATION:

1. What do you understand by Spreadsheet Package?

2. (a) Give FIVE examples of Spreadsheet Package

(b) State SEVEN uses of Spreadsheet Package

WEEKEND ASSIGNMENT

1. ............................. is a package that is majorly used for
organizing and analyzing numeric data.

  (a) Word-processing (b) Graphics (c) Spreadsheet (d) Mavis Beacon

2. Which of the following is NOT an example of spreadsheet package?

(a) MS Excel (b) GS-Calc (c) Adobe PageMaker (d) STATVEIW

3. Which of the following is a major function of spreadsheet packages?

  (a) for financial projection and analysis (b) for compiling the names
  of staff in an organisation (c) for preparing official documents (d)
  for artistic display

4. The Spreadsheet package is referred to as a/an
................................. program

(a) System (b) Application (c) Calculation (d) Analysis

WEEK 3

TOPIC: SPREADSHEET PACKAGES II

CONTENT: - Spreadsheet Features and Terminologies

- Loading and Exiting Spreadsheet Packages

Sub-Topic 1:

Spreadsheet Features and Terminologies

To fully understand and use a spreadsheet package, one must be used to
some terminologies. These terminologies include;

- Row

- Column

- Cell

- Active Cell

- Worksheets

- Workbook

- Chart

- Data Range

- Fill handle

- Moving border

ROWS:

A Row is a horizontal line of cells which runs from left to right in a
worksheet. They can be identified by the numbers at the left hand side
of the sheet numbered from 1 to 1,048,576

COLUMNS:

A Column is a vertical line of cells in a worksheet usually identified
by letters across the top of the sheet. There are about 16,384 columns
in Excel 2007.

CELL:

A Cell is the intersection of a row and a column. The highlighted
rectangle on the cell is the cursor but is known as ‘cell pointer’ which
enable users to move around the sheet. They can be identified by the
combination of column header (e.g ‘A’) and the row header (e.g ‘1’) to
give cell A1.

ACTIVE CELL:

The active cell is the cell that contains the cell pointer, while the
active worksheet is the worksheet where the cell pointer is currently
located.

WORKSHEET:

The worksheet (also known as spreadsheet) is the working area of the
package where entering of data and calculations are handled. It consists
of rows, columns, cells and a cell pointer where data are actually
entered and manipulated.

WORKBOOK:

This can be simply defined as a collection of worksheets. Each workbook
contains many worksheets just like a normal single book with a number of
pages.

CHART:

A Chart is a graphical representation of data that enables you to
understand the data at a glance. Examples of Charts includes Column
(histogram), Pie chart, Bar Chart, Line Chart, Surface, Doughnut, etc.

DATA RANGE:

A group of highlighted cells in a worksheet is referred to as a Range.

FILL HANDLE:

This is a small black square at the corner of selected cells. The cursor
changes to a black cross when moved to it.

MOVING BORDER:

This is an animated border that appears around a selected cell that has
been cut or copied. Press the ESC key to cancel a moving border.

The features of a typical Microsoft environment is presented below;

[]

NOTE: Educators should please ensure that the Excel environment is
carefully treated with the participation of the students.

Sub-topic 2:

LOADING AND EXITING SPREADSHEET PACKAGES

Loading the Spreadsheet Package

To load a spreadsheet package, take the following steps:

- Click on the START button

- Point to ALL PROGRAMS

- Point to Microsoft Office

- Click on Microsoft Excel

METHOD II

Double-click the Microsoft Excel icon on the desktop. The spreadsheet
package opens. The active cell is cell A1 and the active worksheet is
sheet1.

Exiting the Spreadsheet package

To exit a spreadsheet package, take any of the following steps:

- Click on the File menu and select Exit.

- Click on the Close button on the title bar

- Press ALT+F4.

EVALUATION:

1. Briefly explain the following terminologies:

(i) Row (ii) Column (iii) Cell (v) Workbook (vi) Data Range

2. Highlight the steps required to load and exit Microsoft Excel

WEEKEND ASSIGNMENT:

1. Which of the following is NOT a spreadsheet terminology?

(a) Fields (b) Cell (c) Workbook (d) Moving border

2. Which of the following key combinations can be used to exit a
spreadsheet package?

(a) CTRL+F4 (b) Pgdn+F4 (c) DEL+F4 (d) ALT+F4

3. In Spreadsheet package, a group of highlighted cells in a worksheet
is referred to as a .............

(a) Limit (b) Range (c) Boundary (d) worksheet

4. To cancel a moving border, simply press the .......................
key

(a) TAB (b) END (c) ALT (d) ESC

5. ................ is a graphical representation of data that enables
you to understand the data at a glance. (a) Row (b) Active cell (c)
Chart (d) Column

6. ............... is a small black square at the corner of selected
cells.

(a) Cell pointer (b) Fill handle (c) Border (d) Marker

WEEK 4

TOPIC: WORKSHEET I

Sub-Topic 1: Definition of a Worksheet:

A Worksheet can be defined as the working area of the program where
entering of data and calculations are handled. It consists of rows,
columns, cells and a cell pointer.

Starting Excel worksheet: This entails the following

(i) opening a worksheet (ii) Data entry (iii) Editing (iv) saving (v)
Retrieving worksheet

Opening a worksheet:

To create a new worksheet, follow the steps below:

- Open Microsoft Excel from the Start button

- Click on Office button to display a sub menu

- Select New

- Click on Create

- A new workbook will be displayed.

Method II:

- Open Microsoft Excel

- Press Ctrl + N

Data Entry:

There are three types of data that can be entered into an excel
worksheet. These are Labels, Numbers and Formula.

Labels are made up of texts that are entered into the active worksheet.
Examples are letters of alphabets (A-Z)

Numbers / values consists of numerals 0 – 9

Formulas are mathematical expressions which return calculated value.

A typical example of data entry is shown below;

[]

Fig. 4.1: Entering data into the worksheet.

NOTE: Educators should please ensure that students practise the act of
entering data into the worksheet by entering the data shown in fig. 4.1
above.

Editing the Worksheet

Editing a worksheet means to either insert data, delete existing ones or
to make corrections to the already existing data. Fig. 4.2 below shows
the edited version of fig. 4.1

[]

Fig. 4.2: Editing Worksheet

NOTE: Educators should please ensure that the students edit the previous
excel sheet (fig 4.1) to give the excel sheet shown above (fig 4.2)

Saving a Worksheet

To save a worksheet for the first time, follow the steps below;

- Click on the Microsoft office Button

- Click on Save

- When the dialog box appears, in the save in box click on the arrow, a
  drop down menu appears.

- Select a location to save e.g My Document

- Type a file name in the File name box.

- Click on Save

  Save in Box Arrow for Drop Down

  []

File Name Box Save Button

Fig 4.3: Save As Dialog Box

Subsequently, just press ctrl + S to continue saving the worksheet.

NOTE: Educators should please show the students other methods of saving
a worksheet

Retrieving a Worksheet

To retrieve an existing or saved worksheet, follow the steps below;

- Load the spreadsheet package (Microsoft Excel in this case)

- Click on the File menu or the Microsoft Office button

- Click on Open, the open dialog box will be displayed

- Click on the arrow beside the Look in box

- Select My Document from the drop down menu

- Click on the File Name

- Click on Open

Sub-Topic 2:

Formatting Worksheet:

The general arrangement of data is known as ‘Formatting’. The contents
of selected cells can be formatted using the formatting tool bar.
Formatting changes the way numbers and text are displayed in a
worksheet.

Changing Fonts:

NOTE: Educators should practically demonstrate the methods of changing
font sizes, style, colour, attributes(bold, italics and underline),
alignment(left, right, center), style, etc.

Formatting values in a range:

The number entered in the worksheet can be formatted to have currency
symbols like the dollar ($). To follow numbers in a worksheet follow the
under listed steps;

- Highlight the number(s) in the desired range

- Click on the arrow beside the number on the ribbon bar

- When the dialog box appears, click on the number tab

- Select Currency

- Click on the arrow beside the symbol to get a drop down menu

- Select the required symbol e.g dollar sign with 2 decimal places

- Click on OK

[]

Fig. 4.4: The Format cells dialog box

NOTE: Educators should please guide the students to format the cells in
fig. 4.2 above using the steps described above.

Adjusting the Column Width:

To adjust the column width so as to accommodate the contents of the
cell, follow the steps below;

- Click on the cell to be adjusted

- Position the cell pointer on the column tab,

- The cell pointer changes to a cross

- Click and drag to the right to increase the column width

- Release the mouse button

NOTE: When the hash sign (#) is displayed inside a cell that contains
data, it means the content of the cell is more than what the cell can
accommodate. The column widths of that cell need to be adjusted.

Renaming the Worksheets

When MS Excel is opened, the sheets are named Sheet 1, Sheet 2, etc. To
rename a worksheet:

- Right click on the sheet tab to be renamed

- Select Rename

- Type the name you wish to give to the sheet

- Press the Enter key

  []

Fig. 4.4: Renaming the worksheet.

Inserting Rows or Columns:

To shift existing rows or columns to create blank rows or columns,
follow the steps below;

- Select the current row or column where the new row or column would be
  inserted

- Click on Insert menu

- Click on rows or columns

EVALUATION:

1. (a) Define a Worksheet.

(b) State the THREE types of data that can be entered into a worksheet.

2. Highlight the steps required to do the following;

(a) Open a worksheet (b) Save a worksheet (c) Retrieve a worksheet

(d) Rename a worksheet

WEEKEND ASSIGNMENT:

1. .................... can be defined as the working area of the
program where entering of data and calculations are handled.

(a) Worksheet (b) Workbook (c) Workcell (d) row

2. Which of the following cannot be found in a worksheet?

  (a) Cell pointer (b) Column (c) Animations (d) Row

3. .................... are mathematical expressions which return
calculated value.

(a) MS Excel (b) Formula (c) Equation (d) Function

4. To save a workbook for future reference, a ......................
must be given to it.

(a) File name (b) File title (c) Reference name (d) Reference title

5. ..................... changes the way numbers and text are displayed
in a worksheet.

(a) Arrangement (b) Decoration (c) Formatting (d) Highlighting

6. ................... sign is displayed when the content of the cell is
more than what the cell can accommodate. (a) ₦ (b) Σ (c) £ (d) #

WEEK 5

TOPIC: WORKSHEET II

Sub-Topic 1: EXCEL CALCULATIONS:

The basic and most powerful feature of Microsoft Excel is the ability to
accept formula into the worksheet. A Formula is an instruction that is
entered to tell Excel how to Add, Subtract, Multiply, Divide, or
otherwise perform calculation by using the content of other cells.

It is advisable to construct formula that makes reference to cells in
the worksheet so that the result can be instantly generated even the
values are changed.

When working on Excel calculations, the following guidelines should be
noted;

(i) To enter a formula, first select the cell that will contain the
formula.

(ii) All formula must begin with equal (=) sign tells Excel to treat the
cells contents as a formula.

(iii) The formula should not be more than 1024 characters.

(iv) The function name (e.g. SUM, AVERAGE) which is preceded by equal
(=) sign must be selected and followed by the desired argument, i.e.
=SUM(A5:F5). In this case, SUM is the function name and A5:F5 is the
argument.

Addition: Using the SUM Function

The SUM function is used to add together a range of data or numbers. To
sum up the values of a range of data:

- Open the worksheet containing data (as previously done in fig 4.2
  above).

- Position the cell pointer on the desired cell i.e. the cell where the
  result should be displayed.

- Type equal sign, Select the function (i.e. SUM) and state the range of
  cells.

- MS Excel will highlight the range specified.

- Press the Enter key.

- The result is displayed.

  []

Fig 5.1: summing up a range of values

NOTE: Educators should kindly ensure that each student follow the steps
above and should also endeavour to explain alternative methods using the
‘AUTOSUM’ symbol (Σ), and Addition sign(+).

Subtraction: Using the IMSUB Function

The IMSUB function is used to find the difference of two numbers. To
find the difference of a range of data;

- Open the worksheet containing data (as previously done in fig 4.2
  above).

- Position the cell pointer on the desired cell i.e. the cell where the
  result should be displayed.

- Type equal sign, Select the function (i.e. IMSUB) and state the range
  of cells, usually two cells.

- MS Excel will highlight the range specified.

- Press the Enter key.

- The result is displayed.

NOTE: Educators should kindly explain alternative methods using the
Subtraction sign (-)

Average: It is also possible to use the spreadsheet package to find the
average of certain values or group of numbers. To find average:

- Position the cell pointer in the desired cell where result is to be
  displayed

- Type “=AVERAGE (DATA RANGE)” in the formula bar

- Press the ENTER KEY

- The result is displayed in the cell

Count:

The count function is used to ascertain the number of cells within a
specified range that contains values. To use the count function;

- Position the cell pointer in the desired cell

- Click on AutoSum (Σ) and select “Count”

- Press the ENTER KEY.

Multiplication:

The multiplication function is solely for multiplication of numbers just
like in arithmetic. To multiply a range of data;

- Position the cell pointer on the desired cell i.e. the cell where the
  result should be displayed.

- Type equal sign, Select the function (i.e. PRODUCT) and state the
  range of cells.

- MS Excel will highlight the range specified.

- Press the Enter key.

- The result is displayed.

Also, the symbol (*) can be used.

Division:

To divide a range of values;

- Position the cell pointer on the desired cell i.e. the cell where the
  result should be displayed.

- Type equal sign, Select the function (i.e. QUOTIENT to display the
  integer portion of a division) and state the range of cells.

- MS Excel will highlight the range specified.

- Press the Enter key.

- The result is displayed.

Also, the symbol (/) can be used to display the exact result.

NOTE: Educators should please endeavour to expose the students to some
other functions embedded in the worksheet program.

Sub-topic 2:

Printing of Worksheet

After the spreadsheet have been formatted and properly calculated the
next thing is to get the worksheet printed. To print your worksheet,
take the following steps:

- Highlight the range to be printed

- Click on the Office button and select Print

- Select the name of the printer from the Printer Name box

- Enter the number of copies to print

- Click on Preview button and select Page Set Up. Set all the necessary
  parameters like margins, page layout, paper size and grid lines (if
  necessary).

- Click on OK

- Click on Print.

  EVALUATION

  1. State THREE guidelines that must be followed when performing excel
  calculations

  2. Highlight the major steps required to carry out the following
  calculations;

  (a) Addition (b) Subtraction (c) Count (d) Average (e) Division

  WEEKEND ASSIGNMENT

  1. Which of the following signs can be used for multiplication in MS
  Excel?

  (a) + (b) X (c) & (d) *

  2. In Excel, the expression C4:F20 is usually referred to as a/an
  .......................

  (a) Function (b) Function Name (c) Argument (d) Expression

  3. In Excel, the function IMSUB is used for .......................

  (a) Addition (b) Subtraction (c) Multiplication (d) Division

  4. The .................. function is used to ascertain the number of
  cells within a specified range containing values.

  (a) MAXIMUM (b) COUNT (c) SORT (d) AVERAGE

WEEK 6

DATE:………………………………….

Activity: PRACTICAL ON EXCEL CALCULATION

WEEK 7

DATE: ……………………..

TOPIC: GRAPH

CONTENT: - Creating Graph

Sub-Topic 1: CREATING GRAPH

GRAPH: A graph is a diagram showing the relationship that exist among
variables, quantities (varies data), usually of two, each measured along
one of a pair of axes at right angles. It may not be possible to plot a
graph without value. The excel spreadsheet provides the values that are
plotted.

Creating graph

To create a graph, you can either use the chart wizard or press the F11
key

Types of Chart

1.  Line graph

2.  Histograms

3.  Pie-charts

4.  Legends

1. Line graph: Line graphs are often used to plot changes in data over
time, such as monthly temperature changes or daily changes in stock
market prices. Line graphs have a vertical axis and a horizontal axis.
If you are plotting changes in data over time, time is plotted along the
horizontal or x-axis and your other data, such as rainfall amounts is
plotted as individual points along the vertical or y-axis

[]

2. Histograms: A histogram consists of tabular frequencies, shown as
adjacent rectangles, erected over discrete intervals (bins), with an
area equal to the frequency of the observations in the interval. The
height of a rectangle is also equal to the frequency density of the
interval.

Sub-Topic 2: PIE CHART and LEGEND

3. PIE-CHART: Pie-charts, or circle graphs as they are sometimes known,
are a little different from the other two types of graphs discussed.

For one, pie charts do not use horizontal and vertical axes to plot
points like the others. They also differ in that they are used to chart
only one variable at a time. As a result, it can only be used to show
percentages. The circle of pie charts represents 100%. The circle is
subdivided into slices representing data values. The size of each slice
shows what part of the 100% it represents.

4. LEGEND: A legend is used to identify each series in a chart. Its
contains on sample of the marker colour and pattern of each series.

EVALUATION

1.  What do you understand by the term chart

2.  List the various types of chart you are familiar with in MS-Excel

ASSIGNMENT

1.  Construct the following

i)  Histogram

ii) Pie chart

iii) Bar chart

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Subject      English      Maths        Computer   Technology   science
  ------------ ------------ ------------ ---------- ------------ ----------
  Scores       50           70           75         60           45

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. The table below gives the age of a group of pupils in a school

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Age (yr)           13   14           15           16           17
  ------------------ ---- ------------ ------------ ------------ ------------
  Number of pupils   1    4            2            2            1

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Draw a bar chart to show the information in the table

3. Represent the information in the table below on a line graph

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Subject        English     Maths        Computer    Basic Sci.  Music
  -------------- ----------- ------------ ----------- ----------- ----------
  Time allotted  100         120          100         100         100

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

WEEK 8

DATE: ………………..

TOPIC: - FORMATTING GRAPHS

CONTENT: - Changing Chart Type

SUB-TOPIC 1

CHANGING CHART TYPE

After creating a chart, you can change it to the type you want. The type
you choose depends on how you want to present your data.

- Select the chart

- Within the chart, click the right mouse button OR

- Click on insert on menu bar

- Click on change Chart type

- Under Chart Type, list click to select the desired chart type (e.g,
  Column, Bar, Line, etc)

Under Chart sub-type list, click to select the chart sub-typed desired.
You can view the chart sample by pressing it and hold to view sample
button.

- Click on OK when satisfied

Changing from histogram to pie chart using the same data

  ADDING AND EDITING CHARTS

  Once you have created a chart, you can add more chart data series or
  copy additional chart data series from a worksheet or another chart.
  Microsoft Excel offers a variety of ways to edit your chart data

  You can change a chart data series by:

- Adding a chart data series to a chart

- Adding or removing more data point to the existing chart data series.

- Plotting the data by rows or by columns.

To add or edit a chart data series with chart wizard tool

- Select the chart you want to edit

- Click the chart wizard tool

- Follow the instruction on the screen

The chart is automatically updated to reflect the new data

Adding more data to the present data gives us

Sub-Topic 2: FORMATTING A CHART

FORMATTING A CHART

You can change the font of chart text, change the horizontal and
vertical alignment and rotate text to a vertical orientation. You can
also change the pattern and color of the text area. The text is
displayed in the front of the area pattern so that it is always visible.
Microsoft Excel automatically formats the charts title and axes title as
bold.

To format chart text with the standard tool bar

- To format all the text in a chart, select the chart by choosing select
  chart from the chart menu. To format a single piece of attached or
  unattached text, click the text to select it. To format tick-mark
  labels for an axis, click the axis to select it.

To format text that appears in a legend, click the legend; click the
legend to select it.

- Click one of the formatting or alignment tools to format the text

  EVALUATION

1.  List the steps involved in formatting chart text

2.  State the steps in adding or editing chart

  WEEKEND ASSIGNMENT:

  Objective Test:

1.  Which of the following is not a type of graph (a) Line graph (b) Pie
    Chart (c) Histogram (d) Bigram

2.  ……………………….. is a circle divided into sections (a) Bar Chart (b)
    Histogram (c) Pictogram (d) Pie- chart

Essay Test:

1. Construct a bar chart for the data below

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  No. of         5     3     8     7     2     8     6     10    1     4
  students                                                             
  -------------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ------
  Performances   10    20    30    40    50    60    70    80    90    100
  in Comp.                                                             
  studies Exam                                                         

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Change the above bar chart to line graph

WEEK 9

DATE…………….

TOPIC: COMPUTER GAMES

CONTENT: Computer Games

Sub-Topic 1: COMPUTER GAMES

Computer game is also called PC game, is a video game played on personal
computer, rather than on a video game console OR Computer games are
software programs used for relaxation and to learn some skills.

Video game is an electronic or computerized game played by manipulating
images on a video display television screen. Examples of computer game
include;

1.  Spider Solitaire 2. Packman 3. Space commander 4. Digger 5.
    Pinball 6. Chess 7. Heart

Some computer games are supplied by Microsoft windows while some are
downloaded from internet. Computer games can be played using the
following input devices:

i)  Keyboard (through the arrow keys)

ii) Joystick

iii) Mouse

iv) Game pad

Reasons for playing Computer games

1.  For the purpose of entertainment

2.  For educational purpose

3.  For teaching purpose

4.  To develops some skills

Types of games:

There are many types of computer games. These have been classified into
three categories:

1.  Recreational games

2.  Skill enhancement

3.  Entertainment games

Sub-Topic 2: Recreational Games; Advantages/Disadvantages of Computer
Games.

RECREATIONAL GAMES

These are games played at leisure time for relaxation after working for
long period of time e.g. Free cell, Casino, heart

Skill Enhancement games

They are games designed for skill enhancement and recycling, Quizzing,
puzzles, Mathematics games

Entertainment Games

These are types of games played to entertain friends and visitors e.g
Musical games, Mimicking and guessing

ADVANTAGES OF COMPUTER GAMES

1.  It helps to stimulate (encourage) children and adult interest in
    learning these of computers.

2.  Computer games helps to develop habit of concentration e. Test Drive
    Game

3.  It can be used to manage or reduce stress condition

4.  Computer games are used for teaching and learning of different
    subjects, e.g Music, mathematics, English, Speed and accuracy e.t.c

5.  Computer games enhanced the physical well being of the player

6.  Computer games are useful for recreation, skill acquisition and
    entertainment.

DISADVANTAGES OF COMPUTER GAMES

1.  It wastes valuable time

2.  It jeopardizes the opportunity for doing other good things

Evaluation

1.  What is computer game

2.  Name three input devices used to play computer games

Weekend Assignment

1.  All the following are computer games except……… (a) Chess (b)
    Trojan (c) Packman (d) Pinball

2.  Computer games can be played using all the following except
    ………….. (a) Computer Keyboard (b) Mouse (c) Joystick (d) Digger

3.  Which of the following is not a reason for playing computer game

(a) For fraudulent purposes (b) For entertainment (c) For educational
    purpose (d) For teaching purposes

4.  ………….. is a computer software used for relaxation to learn skill (a)
    Anti virus (b) Computer (c) Games (d) Game pad

Essay

1.  Mention two reasons for playing game

2.  State four disadvantages of playing computer game.

WEEKS 10-13: REVISION AND EXAMINATION
